Hi, good afternoon.
Welcome to session 415,
What's New In The File System?
I'm Deric Horn,
the Application Frameworks
and File Systems Evangelist,
and I'll be joined a little
bit later by Dominic Giampaolo,
File Systems Engineer.
So today I'd like to start
off by going over a little
recap of some of the important
features we introduced in Tiger.
Those include the copy engine,
extended attributes,
introduction of access control lists.
Then we're going to talk about some of
the really important new features that
we're introducing today in Leopard.
Things like ""safe save",
move to trash" functionality.
And then Dominic's going to
come up on stage and talk about
filesystem event notification.
This is a very heavily
requested feature from you,
the developers,
and it's really a very elegant API.
And we'll have plenty of
time for Q&A afterwards.
So I'd like to start off with a little
filesystems architecture diagram.
Here on the upper left,
we see a typical Cocoa application.
Cocoa applications being object-oriented
call down into the NSFileManager.
And NSFileManager offers
object-oriented APIs.
And in turn, the NSFileManager calls down
directly down to the BSD layer,
and also down to the
Core Services File Manager.
I just want to take a minute and
kind of talk a little bit about
the Core Services File Manager.
The Core Services File Manager is what
we used to call the Carbon File Manager.
And it contains those
familiar APIs to us,
those FSRef-based APIs,
the old FSSpec-based APIs,
the APIs located in files.h.
So the core services file manager
offers an abstraction layer above
the BSD APIs and the volume format,
like discrepancies underneath, right?
How resource forks are stored,
how extended attributes are stored.
So we don't have to bother with that.
We use one familiar API.
And it's really a thin layer
right above the BSD APIs,
actually located in the
Carbon Core framework.
So obviously,
we have Carbon applications,
which call down directly to
the core services file manager.
And then on the right hand side,
command utilities.
Typical command line utilities will
call down directly down to the BSD APIs.
But we often find that command
line utilities also like to take
advantage of the abstraction that the
core services file manager offers.
So they also call down into
the core services file manager.
So I've got a long history
with the filesystem.
I started out on the development side
back in the HFS+ days and moved over
into the filesystem on the Carbon,
and then moved over to
developer relations where I got
to work with a lot of you.
And by far,
I'd say the most requested feature
from you developers has been
to give me access to the same
copy engine that the Finder uses.
Well, in Tiger we introduced
the FSCopyObject API.
This is a high performance
API which is tuned for performance
across all volume formats.
And it's the same copy
engine that the Finder uses.
During its copy, it manages copying all
the metadata for you,
the data fork, resource fork,
extended attributes, and so forth.
And it comes in those four
familiar sets of APIs,
and those are the FSRef-based,
both synchronous and asynchronous APIs,
as well as the path-based
synchronous and asynchronous APIs.
So we have the FSCopyObjectSynchronous
for the FSRef-based synchronous,
versus the FSPathCopyObjectAsync,
path-based asynchronous APIs.
So here's a little snippet of how to
use the FSPath Copy Object Sync API,
and underneath it, its counterpart,
the FSPath Move Object Sync API.
I'm not going to go into the code,
but periodically you'll see these yellow
boxes at the bottom of the slides.
And that will detail where
you can find examples.
So if you look in the
WWDC attendees site,
and the area associated with session 415,
you should find a sample
called FS file operation.
And this is going to have details of the
implementation of the copy object APIs.
So, extended attributes.
Extended attributes are really
a great way of associating some
metadata with any file or directory.
So if you want to leave a
little breadcrumb with any file,
whether you own it or not,
and just attach it to a file,
you can do this with extended attributes.
It's supported across all volume formats,
and we typically recommend that you
use the reverse DNS name convention.
So if you were to look
at your filesystem today,
you'd notice a lot of files have the
com.apple.finderinfo extended attribute,
and that's going to contain
just what you'd expect.
Things like the type, creator,
maybe label information that
the finder is going to save.
I also want to mention the
"ctime" that you get back from
"stat". When you "stat" a file,
it will return back the
"ctime". I just want to clarify
a little bit what this is.
This actually represents
the status change time.
So the last time you change
any attribute on the file,
the "ctime" is updated.
So for instance,
if you're writing a backup application,
you might want to compare the
"content_mod_date" to the "ctime" to see
if potentially you don't have to actually
backup the actual contents of the file,
the actual data portion of the file.
You may just be sufficient
in backing up the attributes,
extended attributes,
and metadata supported with that file.
But you should be aware of the current
limitations of extended attributes.
So in general, extended attributes are
going to be under 4K.
I believe on HFS+ volumes,
it's 3083 bytes.
I think that's been drilled into me now.
It's set up so that you're
going to read an entire extended
attribute in one fell swoop.
It's not a stream-based call.
You're going to go ahead and allocate a
buffer and read it all in at one time.
And likewise,
when you write an extended attribute,
you write it all out at once.
Now,
I said this is kind of a generalization.
The one exception is the resource fork.
So the resource fork,
you can access through
extended attributes,
and at this time, you can access it kind
of in a stream-based API.
What I really mean by that is
you can set the file position to
potentially halfway through the
resource fork and continue reading.
Whether or not you deal with
extended attributes directly,
you should always be mindful of them.
Whether you're writing an FTP client,
an archiver, or so forth,
there are always three rules
that you have to be aware of.
And that is to be mindful
of the data of the file,
extended attributes of the file,
and security information.
So sometimes I wish all Apple engineers
were mindful of these three rules.
So let's take a deeper look at the APIs.
The APIs to access extended
attributes are the get-x-addr,
set-x-addr, list-x-addr,
and remove-x-addr APIs.
These are all BSD-level APIs.
Really shouldn't matter
whether you're Carbon,
Cocoa.
You can still call BSD APIs directly.
The method for actually getting the size
of an extended attribute is quite easy.
We'll use the Get XAddr API and
specify null for our buffer,
at which time it will return back
the size of the extended attribute.
You can then allocate your
buffer to be that size,
call XAddr again, passing in that buffer,
and read in the entire buffer.
Again, for samples of how to use
the extended attribute APIs,
we have the filesystem_example sample.
So, access control lists.
So typical Unix permissions
are what we would call,
or what we all know of as, owner group,
other, read, write, and execute,
or as I call them, user group world,
read, write, and execute.
Very limited.
We're not allowed to
create more than 16 groups.
We can't nest groups.
So in Tiger,
we introduced access control lists,
or ACLs.
They provide a much finer granularity
security permissions for a file.
So for instance,
we can either allow or deny a
user or group to append to a file.
We can either allow or deny someone
to actually read the ACL information
on this file or directory.
So access control lists
were introduced in Tiger,
but we had them turned off by default.
Now in Leopard,
we're turning them on by default.
There's a few tools that you can use to
access your access control information.
So a typical tool, ls,
if you specify the "-e" option,
it'll print out all the extended
attribute information associated
with that file or directory.
Likewise,
ChangeMod with the "+A" option is a
great way of either allowing or denying
users access control list information.
You should also be aware if
you're writing your application
now and you want to make use of
access control lists on Tiger,
for instance,
you can use the FS ACL control
tool to turn on or off access
control lists for that volume.
So as I said in Tiger,
they're turned off by default.
Use the FS ACL control tool and you can
turn them back on on that Tiger volume.
Again, these are BSD-level APIs,
and I wanted to mention that they're
used heavily in the .Mac servers.
So this was really a big push to
control access information and
permissions for users and groups on
the .Mac servers that we all use.
And now in Leopard,
we have full finder integration,
so when you do a "Get Info
in a File", you're going to
see all the ACL information,
more detailed ACL information.
Again, you can find samples of this in
the "File System Examples" sample.
Okay, now on to some of the fantastic
new features that we're
introducing today for Leopard.
First one, ""safe save". We're all pretty
familiar with how this works,
right?
You have your original file,
you write out a new file,
once it's coherent,
we're going to want to replace
the original with our new file.
Up until now,
I would say it's been almost a burden
to implement ""safe save"" for yourself,
based on all the
different volume formats,
and the details of the
underlying formats,
and which options they support
and which ones they don't.
We're going to talk about
the ""safe save"" API,
replace object,
available through the core
services API through files.h.
It's supported on all file systems,
and it's largely based
on the renamed semantics.
It's designed to properly
preserve all your metadata.
and by and large, in the past,
maybe on Mac OS 9,
we used something like FSExchangeObjects.
And this was a great way to do safe save.
But the big problem on Mac OS X is
that this was really limiting.
It only worked on files,
and it was really only designed
to work on HFS+ type volumes.
So we weren't able to
use it on NFS volumes,
for instance.
By releasing a new API,
this gives us the opportunity
to do what's best in each
particular volume format.
So for instance, on HFS+ volumes,
we can go ahead and call
exchange data under the hood,
if that's the best way to do it.
I want to mention that now in Leopard,
if you're a Cocoa developer,
it's used by default in NSDocument.
So in the case of a catastrophe while
you're saving a file using NSDocument,
you may notice that a file might
be created called "a document being
saved by text edit" in brackets.
This would be your original file,
maybe while you're writing it out,
network cable gets pulled,
power goes out,
something along those lines.
You can get more information on
that in the AppKit release notes,
and specifically there's a section
in there called "advice for
overwriters of NSDocument reading
and writing methods". Thank you.
So the Replace
Object API is Mac OS X API,
which does really what we'd
expect from a Mac OS X API.
What I mean by that is we can not
only replace files with files,
or directories with directories,
but we can replace
files with directories,
or directories with files.
This is really especially useful
if you've ever maybe edited
a README file in TextEdit.
And you're editing your README file,
and then you decide to start
pasting some pictures in there,
and you notice that your README file
changes from README.RTF to README.RTFD.
That file is actually a document package.
So for instance,
if you're saving a file to
your iDisk in this case,
you can go ahead,
you have your original file,
go ahead and make your entire
document package hierarchy,
make everything coherent.
Once you have the entire
document hierarchy coherent,
replace that original file
with your document package.
There can be only one.
What I mean by that is the
way the API works by default.
When you call replace object,
you have your original file
and you have your new file.
After replace object is called,
you end up with your new file
in the original file's location,
one file object when you're done.
Of course, we have plenty of options to
override the default behavior.
The "save original as
backup" is one of them,
in which case you might want
to specify a directory to save
your original as a backup.
We have an accessory routine
called fsgettemporarydirectory
for replace object.
This is a higher-level API which
might sit on top of find folder,
and it will return back the
best place on this volume to
save your files as a backup.
Not only is it a good API to use to
find the best place to save your backup,
one of the things, as you can imagine,
about replace object is that your
new file and your original file
have to be on the same volume.
We can't have our new
file on our local file.
We can't have our new file on our local
disk and our original file on our network
disk and expect this to be one operation.
By calling the fsgettemporarydirectory
for replace object,
it will return back a suitable location
on the same volume as the original file.
The default behavior of replace object is
to actually merge the extended attributes
of the original file and the new file.
In the case of a collision,
the priority is given to the
new file's extended attributes.
and with ACLs,
we take quite the opposite approach.
We will take the security
information from the original file,
move the new file into that location,
and then apply it to the new file.
Again, we have options to override
both of these behaviors.
Here's some sample implementation file.
Actually, there is actually sample code,
and I believe the sample is
called FSReplaceObjectSampleCode,
found in the same location.
Move to trash.
This is actually quite
a complicated problem.
When someone wants to move a
file to the appropriate trash,
it's hard to know what
the appropriate trash is.
We have the /usr/trash, /trash,
/networktrashes, I believe.
And some volumes don't
even have trash cans.
So typically what developers have
done in the past is maybe create an
Apple script that says something like,
"Tell finder move file object to
trash." This is really a suboptimal
approach for many reasons.
Once the finder does this,
you have no idea where the file went.
You have no idea if it succeeded
or if the finder is presenting
a dialog in the background.
So now in Leopard,
we're introducing the fs
move object to trash API.
It will move your filesystem
object to the proper trash.
So now in Leopard,
we're introducing the fs
move object to trash API.
It will move your filesystem
object to the proper trash.
and it will return a
reference to the moved item.
One of the reasons why it returns
back a reference to the moved item
is because it can potentially rename
that filesystem object en route to
the trash in case of a name collision.
The Move to Trash API will return back a
-120 or directory not found error in the
case where it cannot find a trash can.
So in this case,
the finder typically presents up
a dialog that says something like,
the item main.c will
be deleted immediately.
Are you sure you want to continue?
You can do the same thing.
Here's a list of other information
that I wanted to get out for Leopard.
Kind of a grab bag of small tidbits here.
In Leopard,
we are finally moving to 64-bit file IDs.
What this really means is that the
alias manager will automatically
resolve your 64-bit file IDs for you,
and so forth.
That integration is already
built into the Finder,
and we will be releasing
higher level APIs to gain
access to the 64-bit file IDs.
UFS.
With the introduction of
case-sensitive HFS+ or HFSx volumes,
there is no longer a big reason
to have UFS disks around.
So starting in Leopard,
we will allow you to
read and write UFS disks,
but we will no longer
format disks as UFS.
Last year at WWDC,
we announced the deprecation
of non-thread-safe filesystems.
Through the KPI right now,
there's a flag to specify whether or
not your filesystem is thread-safe.
And we went through the hoops in
VFS layer to make sure that your
filesystem did the right thing.
Now, starting in Leopard,
those non-thread-safe filesystems
are going to be unsupported.
and things that I know
that you would never do.
Dot underscore files, right?
I think most of you know what those are.
Those are the Apple double files that
we sometimes have to save the resource
fork or extend attribute information in.
We store them in dot underscore files,
for instance,
if you're saving it to an NFS volume,
and we've all seen these
kind of lingering around.
In the past,
a lot of this functionality was
in the core services file manager.
So the way we do things is, for instance,
write out the size of the--
when we touch the resource fork,
we would write out the size
of the resource fork into the
header of the Apple double file.
And then we'd go ahead and write
out that entire resource fork.
Well, as we move this functionality from
the core services file manager
and push it down into the kernel,
we operate under
different constraints now.
So now we're going to effectively
write out the size information and
the resource fork at the same time
when the file is actually closed.
But you shouldn't be accessing
the ._ file directly anyway.
The /RSRC.
If we have a file named
"foo" on an HFS+ volume,
for instance,
we can always go cat foo/rsrc,
and this will actually catalog the
entire resource fork of the file foo.
This was kind of a hack, as I mentioned,
because it really only worked
on certain volume formats.
And now, since we pushed a lot of this
functionality down into the kernel,
we're removing that back in,
or that hack anyway.
Removal of VOLFS.
So in the past,
if you ran the FS usage tool,
you would notice a whole bunch of reads
and writes going to /.vol directory,
and you typically see
a file ID after that.
We're starting to close
the hole on VOLFS,
so you're no longer going to see that.
We have a great tech note, 11.13,
describing the /.vol and VOLFS.
And one of the comments in there,
or one of the notes in there, says,
"Under no circumstances should
your application construct paths
with /.vol." So this still applies.
At this time, I would like to welcome
Dominic Giampaolo.
All right, I'm on.
I'm Dominic Giampaolo.
I'm a filesystem engineer,
and I'm here to talk about the
filesystem events framework.
First, I'll go over the agenda of what
we're going to cover today.
I'm going to start with some history and
background about what the problem is,
or how we see it,
and what's difficult about it,
what we were trying to do
with the FS Events Framework.
I'll introduce the
FS Events Framework API itself.
And of course,
since this is a developer conference,
we're going to go through some
code and an example application
that uses the FS Events Framework,
and then review and wrap up.
What is the problem?
Well,
there's two classes of problems that
we see or we get a lot of requests for.
Did anything change in this hierarchy?
So you have an application
like iPhoto or iTunes,
and it manages some large hierarchy.
Did something change underneath of there?
You have other applications
where they're running live,
including something like
iPhoto or iTunes or the Finder.
Is anything changing in this hierarchy?
So there may be some window
that's open that represents
some current file system state,
and you want to know,
is anything currently changing
underneath there because
I need to update my display?
So those are actually
really difficult questions.
And historically, there has been no good
answer to those questions.
We also see that different applications
want different kinds of answers.
What changed differs depending on
what type of application you are.
So what exactly is a
filesystem and event?
At a low level,
a filesystem event is a create, a rename,
a delete.
It's other more subtle things such
as the update to the mod time or
the ownership permissions of a file.
It's when a file changes.
It's really quite a bit
of low-level events.
At a high level,
an event is something like, "Well,
I saved a document." From my perspective,
that's one thing.
As a user,
I hit save and there's a file there now.
In reality, when you change a file
and you do a safe save,
as Deric alluded to,
there may be a whole bunch of
operations that go on under the hood.
And in practice, if you've ever looked at
it from the underside,
as I'm frequently doing,
you'll see that a filesystem save
operation from an application may be 5,
10, or 20 even, actual events that come
through at a low level.
The raw stream of events that
we see generated is really
very difficult to manage.
It's a big fire hose
and it's quite complex.
Now, clearly everybody hasn't just sat
around for 20 years waiting for us
to introduce the FS events framework.
They've come up with other solutions.
At one level you have polling.
"Did this file change?
Did this file change?
Did this file change?" And so on.
Or a full rescan.
You know,
if you have a backup application,
typically it walks the whole filesystem
hierarchy to find out what is different
and what needs to be backed up.
[Transcript missing]
There's no history of events.
You can't say, "Well,
this backup application, or whatever,
this synchronization app,
or whatever have you,
hasn't run for a week.
What changed in the last week?" So,
not having any history,
all of these things were sort of live,
not having any history
was a bit of a problem.
And the chaos subsystem
is extremely powerful,
but kernel-level monitoring is not
practical for most applications.
Typically,
people are not going to write a KEXT to
go along with their user-level app.
Something else that we introduced
in Tiger was called DevEvS Events.
Well, we didn't really introduce it,
but a number of you found it anyway.
It was implemented for
Spotlight specifically.
And it provides a raw stream
of events to support the
functionality that Spotlight needs.
It's all locally generated events.
So any change to any file
system that's mounted locally,
or any change that's produced by a
local application produces an event.
The events are very raw.
As I said, you see everything that
comes out of the kernel.
So a stat change,
a permission change-- well,
permission change is a stat change,
an ownership change,
when a file is closed
after being written,
you get a modification, renames, deletes.
It's everything.
Because it's a kernel-based mechanism,
it's also sensitive to slow clients for
some reasonably complicated reasons.
It has limited buffer
space in the kernel.
And it's shared by all the clients.
If someone is slow at reading them,
it will back up,
and eventually it will run out of space,
and events are lost,
which is a fairly catastrophic event.
So because it's sensitive
to slow clients,
it's not really appropriate to open
that up to general purpose applications.
Besides, with the event stream
being as raw as it is,
it's not as useful either.
With all these problems,
we clearly have an
opportunity on our hands.
So, we started thinking about it,
and we decided to come up
with the FSEvents framework.
I'd like to talk a little bit
about our design rationale,
so you understand where
we're coming from.
We sort of thought about some
of the different clients.
Clearly,
as you can see from the Leopard preview,
backup is important,
sync is another application,
and of course the Venerable Finder.
Backup and sync will ask the question,
"Did anything change in this hierarchy?"
The Finder is more of an online,
live kind of "Is anything changing in
this hierarchy?" type of application.
Clients we know that we aren't
going to satisfy are virus checkers.
Virus checkers really have very
sophisticated requirements that
can't be met with this API,
and the KAUTH subsystem is
actually more appropriate.
So, we're not trying to be
all things to all people.
We also knew that we had to put
some limitations on the API.
and constraints on the problem to
make it a little bit more tractable.
Storing a complete log of
events is just not possible.
Your computer is designed to run
user applications and to do things,
not to sit around storing all the
stuff that you're trying to do,
but it's being interfered with by
the fact that you're storing all
the events that you're trying to do.
So we have to really filter the event
stream down to something manageable,
something digestible that
makes sense to applications.
If you look at the raw event stream,
it's extremely complicated to understand,
"Oh,
that was a safe-- those 20 operations
were actually just a safe save
of a single file." And as I said,
we can't be all things to all people,
so we had to narrow things down a bit.
So without further ado,
introducing the FSEvents framework.
This is a core foundation-based API that
lets you watch an entire hierarchy
of-- a file hierarchy for changes.
You get directory-level
notifications of changes that
happen within that hierarchy.
So if you say,
"I want to watch the user's
home directory," and I'll
go into more detail on this,
you'll find out specific locations
that have changed within it.
We offer a persistent change history,
and again, I'm going to go into more
detail about all of these.
And we have fine control over the
frequency of updates that you get.
What don't you get?
You don't get events for
changes to specific files.
And I'll talk about this again
more in the later slides,
but you can't say, "Did file foo change?"
What does it architecturally look like?
This sort of helps to understand
what's going on under the covers.
At the top level,
FSEvents is obviously the framework,
the API that you as developers can call.
There's a corresponding daemon,
FSEventsD, that orchestrates things
behind the scenes.
FSEventsD is based on the DevFS events
device that provides the raw
stream of events from the kernel.
It filters,
FSEventsD filters the event stream
into something that is coherent,
sends the updates through a
Mach message to client applications,
and it also keeps the historical records.
Actually, I should go back.
So as you can see,
we have the event history that's
being stored away on disk.
FSEventsD is reading the
events out of the kernel,
passing them over to
the FSEvents framework,
which in turn hooks into the
core foundation-based API.
So what are the concepts
behind the FSEvents framework?
You can monitor a path in
the filesystem namespace,
and you get only events that
happen beneath that path.
So yes,
you can watch slash and you'll see
all the directories that are changed,
all the directories that have changes
made to them anywhere in the filesystem.
All events that you get have
a corresponding event ID.
Event IDs are 64-bit,
so they never get recycled,
at least not for,
now let's say about 5,000 years.
You can ask for all the events
since a specific event ID.
As I said, event IDs are persistent,
so they last across a reboot.
When you get an event,
you're supposed to use it to figure out
what happened that's of interest to you,
and then, of course, do the right thing.
The path that you watch
doesn't have to actually exist.
It's actually just a
string-based prefix match.
So you can watch something
that doesn't exist,
and when it does come into existence,
you'll start receiving events for the
changes that happen under that path.
For now,
the path has to be an absolute path.
Even in the future, if we allow you to
specify a relative path,
we're just going to turn
it into an absolute path.
As I said, you get events for anything
that changes under the path.
You can watch any number
of paths that you want,
I suppose within reason, of course.
And security, right now there is none,
but obviously there will be,
so you're not going to be
able to watch things that you
don't have permission to see.
Here's some specific examples.
If you watch users foo and then
someone creates the file users foo
documents my cool stuff new file,
you get an event,
the event that you get is
for the directory users foo
documents my cool stuff.
If someone creates slash temp ignore me,
you don't get any event,
nothing comes through to you
because you're not watching that,
you're only watching users foo.
You don't find out about
changes to the root of the path.
So for example, if you chose to watch a
directory which didn't exist,
let's say users foo sumdir,
and then someone creates it,
you don't get an event for that.
If then they create
something inside of there,
then you do get an event.
Now as it says,
this is open to discussion because
we've kind of gone back and forth.
Clearly it's something
that's easy to work around.
You just watch one level above for
the thing that you're looking for.
But it's something that we'd
like to get feedback on.
[Transcript missing]
We also had a few assumptions.
And I want to detail these so we
understand where we're coming from.
First off,
clients that want to monitor some
large file hierarchy have to have
a mechanism to generate their
initial state about what it is they
care about about that hierarchy.
So you have to have code that
does a full scan and knows how
to process that and build state.
If you have code that does a full scan,
it's pretty straightforward to make it
code that does a partial scan by saying,
oh,
just go update this particular directory.
And given a directory that changed,
you can scan that directory and
update your internal state based
on what differences you find
that are interesting to you.
So we sort of have, like I said,
those assumptions about what
clients are going to have to do to
maintain their state given the event
notifications that they receive.
Now, we'll go to this demo machine and
we'll go through a simple example
that shows how the raw event stream
that comes out of the FS events API.
So we have this tool down
here called FSEvents.
And this just prints out all
the events that it receives.
As you can see,
I'm specifying an option of
a latency-- dash latency 1.0.
And I'm going to give it the path
slash so that we see everything
that changes on the system.
So we may actually see some other
stuff depending on what Damon's run,
what goes on.
Now, I have this other terminal window.
And I'm going to make a directory,
and I'll call it foo-- wonderful name.
About a second later,
you see that we got an
event for users/apple/dbg,
because that's the directory.
If you see, that's where I'm at,
and that's the directory that I created.
If I go into foo and I touch new file,
we're going to get an event
for the directory foo,
because that is what changed.
Another example, I'm going to geek out
here for just a second,
to create a whole bunch of files.
So we're going to create
a couple thousand files,
and I want you to observe... So that
created... This machine's too fast.
I need to slow it down.
Well, alright, I can play this game too.
We'll create a lot of files.
All right, thwarted.
All right,
so now what you see is that we're
getting multiple events as I'm
creating many thousands of files here.
And they're coming through.
And what I wanted to demonstrate is,
if I went down here and changed
this latency-- like you may say,
oh, one second, that's too long.
I can't tolerate that kind of latency.
So I'm going to have
a 0.1 second latency.
Now, if I go up here and create-- well,
I'm not going to create
that many files this time.
You see,
we get a whole lot more notifications.
Now, this is obviously good if you need
to update in that kind of real time.
But typically,
you want to have a latency that's long
enough so that events get compressed.
Because 4,000 files were
created in this directory.
But really,
I only want to have to do one re-scan
at the end when the dust has settled,
so to speak.
So if I was to change this latency and,
say, use a 2.0 second latency,
and then go and create
all those files again.
Whoops, that one.
What you'll see is that that
will run and I might get one or
two events instead of 10 or 15.
In fact, I only got one event.
Now, you see these event IDs.
I will show you the history.
If I specify-- well,
let's do latency 1.0 and I'll
specify a dash since when.
And I'm going to say-- because
I was paying attention earlier.
So this is actually going to be a fair
number of events that are going to
come through for the history since,
let's say,
a time-- an event ID of 320,000,
which when I came into the room was
roughly what the event IDs were at.
Whoops,
I have to give it a directory to watch.
So here we see everything
that's changed since-- so you
can see Spotlight was busy.
Something changed in /dev,
which is probably worth ignoring.
And these are all the other directories.
In fact, we can see that the fseventsd
was writing to its directory.
Temporary items,
preferences got modified.
So again, this is what's happened since
that particular event ID.
And then you can see that users
dbgfoo got a few updates as well.
These get coalesced on
a 30-second granularity.
That's not super interesting,
but you can get multiple
events for the same directory.
So this is just kind of giving
you an example of the parameters
and options that you have
with the fseventsd framework.
So if we go back to the slides--
So now we're going to get into talking
about the specifics of the API.
The data types that you have to
worry about-- it's a very simple API.
First thing you have to know
about is the FSEventsStream.
This is the channel that you receive the
notifications on when there's changes.
It's a CF run loop provider,
so you can create it,
schedule it on a run loop,
and we'll go into those details too.
And then the next data type--
not really a data type,
but the FSEventsStream callback,
which is a typedef for the API that
you have for your callback function.
And that's what gets called each
time that there are changes.
FS Event Stream Create is a
standard CF run loop provider,
so there's a variety of template
arguments that you expect,
the CFAllocators,
there's a context pointer.
The arguments that are of interest
for the event stream itself are,
first and foremost, the callback,
or perhaps the paths
are even more important.
The paths is a CFArray of CFStrings of
paths that you want to watch.
The since when parameter,
which is a 64-bit ID,
that's the starting event ID,
we have a couple of
different options for that.
You can specify since now,
which means just from the current time,
from when you get this forward
is when I want to receive events.
Or you could specify zero,
which would be from
the beginning of time,
but you probably don't want to do that.
Or you can specify an actual event.
You can specify the current event ID,
which is the last one that you saw.
The latency is the frequency of
updates that you want to receive,
or how often you want to be called.
So as you saw,
I was specifying like 1.0 for one second,
or 0.1 seconds,
and that's how you will receive
events at most that frequently.
There's also a flags argument,
but we don't have any flags,
so you can just pass zero
or the constant for none.
The lifecycle of an FS event
stream looks like this.
You create it first,
specifying the arguments that you want.
Then you schedule it on a run loop.
Then you have to start the event stream.
Again, we have very sort of explicit
phases so that you have pretty
good control over when you,
so you're creating it,
then you can start it so that you know
that everything in your application
will be initialized at that point,
and your callback's going
to start being called.
You can stop an event stream,
which allows you to do clean
teardowns so you don't have to
worry about race conditions between,
"Oh, I'm still getting events called
back," and "I need to stop it," and,
you know, this is a very
straightforward way to do it.
Once you stop an event stream,
you can restart it if you want.
Once you call invalidate,
the thing is basically
headed for the bit bucket,
and the only other thing you
can really do is call release.
The callback itself gets
a couple of arguments.
There is first the number
of events that you receive.
You may receive more than one event.
If you have a very long latency,
you may get 10 or 20 or 30 events.
I forget what the maximum
is that will pass at a time,
but you can receive quite a few.
You get three parallel arrays,
and you get the paths for each event.
So the event paths array,
the first entry is for the first event,
and that tells you which directory
under the hierarchy that you're
interested in that was modified.
For each event,
you also get a flags argument
and an event ID as well.
The flags argument is very important.
Normally, it's just going to be 0,
which is good.
That means nothing of interest happened.
You may also receive one
of these three flags.
The first one, must scan sub dirs,
means that, well,
there were some problems.
As I said, devfs events in the kernel
has limited buffer space,
and when it starts to get tight on space,
it will start to combine events.
So what can happen is that
you will receive an event
for some directory within the
hierarchy which you're watching,
but it says what this flag means is that
you need to rescan from that point down.
This is an unfortunate circumstance,
but it's better than clearly having
to rescan the entire hierarchy.
. Again, we go to great lengths to
avoid having this happen,
but if it does happen,
you need to be aware
that if that bit is set,
you need to rescan from that
point down to be able to find
all the changes that happened.
The next two flags are a
little bit more serious,
and hopefully you'll never see them.
The first one is called "Flags
User Dropped". What this means
is that your application was
not reading events fast enough,
the callback wasn't processing
the data fast enough,
and things got clogged up,
and we had to drop events for you.
Something changed,
we can't tell you what,
because you weren't
reading them fast enough.
Now this is catastrophic in the
sense that you now have to do a
full rescan of the entire hierarchy
that you were interested in,
but it's a very clear indication that
you need to make sure that the you're
processing the callback fast enough.
The next event,
"Kernel Dropped", there's nothing
that you can do about this.
You have to do a full rescan,
but things got so clogged up
that the kernel couldn't even
keep up with the stream of
events that were being generated.
And again,
this is catastrophic in the sense that it
means that you have to do a full rescan.
So we go to great lengths
to avoid these things,
but realistically they can happen,
and you need to be aware of that.
The last array is the event ID.
For each path,
it has the flags and an event ID.
These are monotonically
increasing numbers.
They are in essence a timestamp,
but they bear no relation to any wall
clock time or anything like that.
It's just a number.
You can store them away for later use.
When your application is shutting down,
the last event that you receive,
you store that ID,
and then you can pick up from
that point in the future.
[Transcript missing]
This program called Watcher,
that I'll start going
through the code in a second,
is, well, sadly,
a command line application
because that's all I'm capable of.
I took a Cocoa programming class,
but it's just, I don't know.
Anyway.
Yeah, what it does is monitors a file
hierarchy and keeps track of the size.
So if something changes
inside of the file hierarchy,
it updates its state and tells
you what the new size is.
And it does that by re-scanning
the one directory that changed.
So it doesn't have to do a full re-scan.
So I can watch a particular
directory hierarchy.
It will build its initial state,
and then it will update
that state as things change.
So there's a little bit of support
code that I'm not going to go into.
I'm not going to go through the
code that walks the directory
hierarchy to build the initial state.
You can figure out that
that's not too exciting,
or the code that parses
the command line options.
So anyway, starting here in main,
we're going to go down.
As I said, the first thing is that we
have to get an absolute path.
So we call real path on the path
that came in on the command line.
And we only support monitoring a
single directory as a simple example.
And if real path fails,
because let's say the
directory doesn't exist,
we just copy it in.
One other thing to point out,
a frequent thing that people
do with the FS events APIs,
they'll go and watch /temp.
And they go, I don't get any events.
Well, that's because /temp is
actually a symbolic link.
So if you call real path,
then it'll resolve the symbolic link.
Now, the first thing that we do is we get
the directory size for that full path.
So that prints out just what
it sees the initial size is.
And that get directory size function
builds some internal state for each of
the directories that it encountered,
and you'll see how we use that later.
Now we're going to go in
and create the event stream.
So up here we have the
fseventstreamcreate,
which is a pretty simple
wrapper function in this case.
And the first thing that I want
to point out is the context,
the fseventstreamcontext.
So your callback function obviously
needs some hook back into your
application data structures.
The fseventstreamcontext
is how you do that.
In this case,
we're going to set our info pointer
to be the path that we're monitoring,
the root of the hierarchy
that we want to monitor.
And so there's some other arguments
that you can fill in if you're a
sophisticated core foundation app.
In this case,
we don't have any need for that.
Next, we create a cfaray of CFStrings and
basically massage the string that we
got into this cfaray of CFStrings.
And then we call fseventstreamcreate.
As I said, you have the callback.
We have this function
called fseventscallback.
We pass it the context pointer.
This is our hook back into the
application data structures.
Pass in that cfaray,
and then the settings that were specified
on the command line for the since when,
latency.
And flags.
In this case, most of these,
except for latency,
are not terribly interesting.
Back in main, once we've got our stream,
we schedule it on the run loop,
and then we start the event stream for
the event stream that we just created.
We're not going to talk
about the flush seconds,
this is a separate thing.
And then we call cf run loop run,
and off it goes to get our events.
Now, first off,
there's a bug in this program,
I'll just tell you that right now,
but I want to go and show
you how it works in practice.
So, down here,
I will run -watcher -latency,
let's be a little aggressive,
and this current directory.
So it tells me that the initial
size is somewhere over 2
megabytes for this directory.
Now, up in this other window,
I'm in a subdirectory there.
And again, I'll - whoops, gee,
I've got a lot of stuff.
Right, so it's removing all these things.
The size of the directory
has gone down a small amount.
So now what I'm going to do
is I'm going to create a file.
And again, I'll geek out.
[Transcript missing]
If I remove that file,
the size will go back down.
Remove junk.
And you can see that it just
re-scanned the one directory
where the changes were made.
So, remove junk, size goes back down
to what it was before,
and everything is okay.
Now, if I open this,
So we have an empty directory,
and you can see that a change was...
Made to the directory
up above by the finder.
If I get a new finder window
and go to applications,
I want to take the calculator
and drag it in here.
We get a whole bunch more.
It goes up by about 5 megabytes.
If I delete that, our size goes back.
Yeah, 5 or 6 megabytes.
Empty the trash.
Yes, I am sure.
And it's gone.
So it plays well regardless.
So that calculator application,
my point of showing that was that
that's actually a bundle and has
a whole bunch of subdirectories
and the FS events stuff.
Tells us about the changes.
If I do make dir, let's say,
a series of directories, A/B/D,
get a series of events,
these changes in sizes are small
because it's just the small
directories that are being created.
But if I go into A, B, C, D,
and then I go and do the D, D again,
we get an event.
And even though we have a
particularly large hierarchy,
we only have to rescan the one
directory that actually changed.
That's the whole point of this allowing
your application to be more efficient.
So again, if I delete it,
the size goes back down.
Now, going back to the code,
what I want to point
out is what the bug is.
Here, you saw I said I got the
initial size of the directory,
and then I created the stream,
and then I started the stream.
The problem is that by getting
the directory size first,
and then starting the event stream,
we've left a window open.
And we all know that there
can be problems with windows.
You want to make sure that you're
getting events after you've
created your initial state.
So the right thing to do here is to
take this code and to put it after
we've started the event stream.
So that once we have our size,
we have our initial size,
then when we start getting updates,
they'll update.
There's no window for things
to change without us receiving
notifications about it.
So that takes care of that.
If we go back to the slides.
All right.
So, it's a summary of what we did.
The application that we showed is just
very basic FS events stream usage because
it's just monitoring a single path,
no complicated stuff with the run loop,
pretty simple guy.
So, just for pedagogical purposes,
we kept it straightforward.
The application creates
its initial state,
and it lets the callback
drive updates to that state.
As I said,
whenever we made a change to a directory,
you know,
somewhere deep in the hierarchy,
it would update that portion of
the state and reflect the new
total size of the hierarchy.
More advanced apps could do
a lot of different things.
They could use the event history.
We didn't actually use that in this case.
They could watch multiple different
hierarchies if they needed to.
They could create multiple streams.
You may have a highly
multi-threaded application,
and different parts of it need
to watch different hierarchies,
and they want -- they
have different run loops,
and they need different event streams.
You can do fancy scheduling --
excuse me -- with start and stop.
As I said, that's a good way to do clean
sort of start up and tear
down of your FS event stream.
You can use custom CFAllocators if
you wanted to and so on.
Now,
some advice and sort of other things.
You have to look at
the flags for an event.
Oh, I suppose actually that's one thing
I didn't show was the callback.
Can we go back to the code?
I kind of forgot the punchline,
so to speak.
So the FSEvents callback is, as I said,
it gets a couple of standard things.
The context pointer is passed to it,
which in our case is the full
path that we are monitoring.
And then for each of the events,
it goes through and takes a look at them.
Now, in this case-- let me just make
this just a wee bit bigger.
[Transcript missing]
So, dropped events are rare,
but you do need to handle them,
as I just showed in the callback.
The types of re-scanning that you
may have to do are starting at some
point in the hierarchy and below,
or everything, which are really just
variants of the same thing.
Another thing that we discovered,
or not discovered,
or sort of realized you could do,
is you can create token events.
So you don't have to be passive
and just listen to what happens.
You can actually do things and
observe those events coming through
the pipeline on the other end.
You can use this to kind of wrap the
beginning and end of some other operation
that someone may be doing on your behalf.
So you may create an initial,
some directory or file
with a well-known name.
You see that the
modification comes through,
and you observe that it's there,
and then a series of
other events may happen.
And then you,
when that operation is complete,
you do a token event at the end.
And so you sort of have begin-end
pairs to know when things are finished.
As I mentioned,
you want to be careful of leaving
windows open between when you generate
your state and when you start receiving
events that would update that state.
It's very important because
they may be small windows,
but you don't want to miss
things that would cause you
to have out-of-date state.
Now, FS events isn't the only thing.
It's a good thing, but it's not always
appropriate in all cases.
A lot of times you go, oh, wow, new API,
got to use it.
And FS events framework
is a good solution,
but it's not the only one.
You may want to consider just using a KQ.
There's no need to change if you're
only monitoring a single directory.
If you have a spool directory and there's
no subdirectories or anything like that,
a KQ is actually probably lighter
weight and more efficient,
less trouble to use than
using the FS events framework.
If you just have to
check a couple of files,
did some particular preference
file change when I wasn't running,
you would not use the
FS events framework.
Simply stack the file and get
the information that you need.
FS events is best when you've got a
really big hierarchy that you want
to monitor or know about changes to,
or you need a history of changes.
If you don't actually need
the history and so on,
it's probably more straightforward to
use a KQ if you only have a few files,
or you only need directory changes
for a single level of hierarchy.
Now, as we've been developing things,
we noticed there's some issues.
So there are going to
be some changes coming.
We realize that you're going to have
to have a GUID for an event stream
to uniquely identify it so that an
event ID is really paired with the
event stream from which it comes.
So that if for some reason you stored
an event ID and then let's say someone
dragged copy stuff to another machine,
that event ID is no
longer really meaningful.
You have to have a way to know
that the underlying event stream
that you're getting is different.
So it's really going to be a pair,
a GUID for the event stream
from which the event ID came.
We're probably going to also introduce
a special event that indicates a volume
was modified outside of our purview.
That is, somebody changed it.
Like if you have an external
FireWire drive and it's taken
somewhere else and modified and
then comes back to a Leopard system,
you need to know about that
because it means that you're
going to have to do a full rescan.
And there's nothing that
we can do about that.
There's no magic in the world
in the sense of if somebody else
makes changes and they don't
record the FS event history,
there's no way to know about that.
We will probably also
have some API cleanups,
so that some little things like the
paths to the callback may become
CFStrings instead of just being
standard C strings like they are now.
On the way in,
you specify a CFArray of CFStrings,
but then the callback
just gets C strings.
So there's some little inconsistencies
there that we'll probably try to resolve.
Again,
we're also very open to feedback and
hearing what people are interested in.
So, in summary,
the FSEvents framework provides
you with a change notification
for any file hierarchy or file
hierarchies that you want to watch.
Monitoring a file hierarchy provides
notifications for changes to
directories within that hierarchy.
Events are coarse-grained, as I said,
they are directory-level changes,
and it gives you a full event history.
The purpose of this is to allow your
application to be more efficient
at processing updates and changes,
so that you don't have to just
rescan an entire hierarchy,
or poll, or periodically stat things
to find out about changes.
So, that's the FSEvents framework,
and I guess that concludes things,
and we have, I think,
about 15 minutes for Q&A.
I just also wanted to mention that
we're starting a filesystems dev list,
a public list.
You can find it at list.apple.com
where you can get eyes like Dominic's,
have discussions.
The filesystems engineers will
be available tomorrow morning,
9am, in the Kernel Extensions Lab,
and also at the Campus Beer Bash.